Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lops, and
today I'm joined by 3 guests, a repeat guest
Nandita Bajaj. She's the executive director of Population Balance,
and I'm also joined by Zachary Neal, professor in
the Department of Psychology at Michigan State University, and
he focuses most of his research on network backbones
and child-free individuals and also Jennifer Watling Nell, professor
of, uh, in the Department of Psychology at Michigan
State University, and she's interested in understanding the prevalence,
characteristics and experiences of child-free adults. Uh, AND today
we're going to talk about child-free choices, a critique
of Stephen J. Shaw's documentary Birth Gap and pro-Nalism
and some other related topics. So, uh, welcome to
all of you. Nandita, you're a return guest. Nice
to see you again, and, uh, Zach and Jennifer,
nice to meet you.
Thank you, Ricardo. Great to see you. Yeah, thanks
for having us on,
Ricardo. Yeah, I'm looking forward to this conversation.
OK, so Jennifer, perhaps I will start with you.
What is it to be child free? Because I
guess that when most people hear the term child
free, uh, probably they have some misconceptions about what
it means, right?
Yeah, that's a great question, Ricardo. So people who
are child free are people who Don't have any
children and more importantly they don't want any children,
so they don't have the desire to have children
and that makes them pretty different from other types
of nonparents. So you have some people out there
that I would kind of call not yet parents.
Those are folks that don't have any children yet,
but they want to have children in the future.
There's also people who don't have any children but
really, really wanted to have children. Those people oftentimes
we would refer to as childless, so child-free people,
the thing that differentiates them is that they don't
have the desire to ever have children.
So child free is always voluntary,
right? It is a voluntary state, yes,
OK. And childless is the term you would use
to refer to people who are involuntarily childless,
is that? Yeah, yeah, that's exactly right. So sometimes
in the academic literature you'll even see child-free people
referred to as voluntarily childless and childless people referred
to as involuntarily childless.
OK, so uh just to dispel some perhaps misconceptions,
you know, that people might have, does child-free have
anything to do with being anti-children? I mean, is
it that people who are child-free just don't like
children? I mean, does it have anything to do
with that or
not? No, so being childfree doesn't actually necessarily mean
that people don't like children, so that's sort of
a myth about child-free people. In fact, there's a
lot of child-free people out there that are in
jobs that are related to children, so Childre teachers,
child-free pediatricians, right? So actually being child free, I,
you know, it doesn't necessarily mean that you hate
children. It just means that you don't want to
have children personally for yourself.
Yeah, so, uh, Zach, perhaps I will ask you
this question. Is a child free choice something that
people advocate for or try to impose on others,
or is it simply a decision that they make
for themselves?
Yeah, it's a great question. You know, I think
it's, it varies by individual. The vast majority of
people that we've encountered that are child-free or identify
as child-free simply see it as a personal choice
they've made for themselves. Now there may be some
people out there who identify as child free and
advocate or identify some of the advantages of a
life without children, but being child-free itself is not
an advocacy position. Certainly there's no agenda on behalf
of child-free people that are attempting to impose or
cause other people to not have children. For the
majority of child-free people, this is just a personal
choice that they've made for themselves, and they're perfectly
happy that, you know, some other people may be
child-free, some other people may want to have children,
some other people are parents, and they're, they're perfectly
OK with, with others, you know, living the reproductive
lifestyle that they've chosen for themselves. So it's, it's
really an individual choice.
I mean, I guess that no one's out there
doing activism to try to create policies to prohibit
people from from procreating.
Certainly it's it's it's certainly not something that we've
seen.
Yeah, me, me neither. So, um, I mean, I,
I don't know which of you wants to answer
this question, but I would like to ask you
about, um, are most people without children as, as
Stephen J. Shaw argues or makes or tries to.
Make the case for in his documentary Birth Gap
childless by circumstance, and I mean, are they, do,
do they or do they really not want children?
And I, I mean, basically the the claim in
the documentary is, and I'm going to cite it
here. A 2010 meta-analysis by Professor Renke Kaiser would
suggest that 10% of women who are childless are
child-free, having chosen not to become mothers, and 10%
are childless for medical reasons, including infertility. So that
leaves a whopping 80% of women without children childless
by circumstance. I mean, is there evidence to back
that claim?
It's, it's certainly a claim that that we're familiar
with and that we're aware that that Mr. Shaw
and others have made. We've not been able to
locate the 2010 meta-analysis that he refers to in
his film, and we've asked him to point us
toward this, this study, and he's been unable to
do so. We're very familiar with Dr. Kaiser's work
on child-free and childless populations. And we've been unable
even in conversation with her to find anything to
support this claim. In fact, Dr. Kaiser's own work
suggests that among people who do not have children,
the majority are voluntarily childless or child-free, and the
set of people who are childless by circumstance or
childless for biological reasons is much, much smaller. Our
own work using data on adults in the United
States supports this. We find that among people who
permanently are without children, The vast majority are in
that situation voluntarily while relatively small numbers are biologically
childless or are what we might call socially childless,
childless because they've not been able to find a
partner or can't afford to have children. The vast
majority who permanently do not have children are in
that situation because they've chosen not to have children.
So you know, to answer your question, you know,
we've We've been unable to find any support for
Mr. Shaw's claim in our own data. We've been
unable to find any support for that claim in
Dr. Kaiser's research, and, you know, attempts at asking
him for, you know, pointing us to the data
that supports it have come up empty handed. So
we really don't see any evidence to support that
claim.
Yeah, and another claim that he makes in the
documentary is there is no trend towards smaller families.
People who do become parents are just as likely
to go on to have 234 or more children
as decades as decades ago. It's all about having
the first, the first child with childlessness having exploded.
I mean, it is. Is child uh childlessness the
cause of declining fertility rates as he argues that?
I don't think that there is evidence that it's
just childlessness, right, so certainly folks who are child
free are not contributing to increasing fertility rates, we
know that. However, we also are still seeing trends
towards smaller families in a lot of places, and
Nanda, I know that you also have did some
work on the fact sheet for this. I don't
know if you want to jump in here as
well.
Yeah, definitely. Thanks, uh, thanks for that question. Yeah,
the evidence actually shows that there's a strong trend
towards smaller families, uh, not necessarily driven by childlessness.
But, uh, in, um, most countries that belong to
the OECD, which is the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, what we see is, um, there is
More and more people are delaying childbirth, so they're
having children later, uh, and often fewer children. So,
um, there has been, for example, a decline in
teenage pregnancies within the US that has been a
really huge, uh, contributor to declining fertility rates. But
also, there's been a huge decline in the number
of people having 4 or more children. Um, INSTEAD,
we are seeing a rise in one-child families, two-child
families, um, as kind of being more normal. And,
uh, definitely, as Jenna said, there are more people
who are child-free by choice, um, but they're not
that strongly contributing to the declining fertility rates. It's
more the delayed parenthood and fewer children.
Mhm. Uh, BUT people who are child free, people
who decide, uh, consciously, uh, that uh that they
do not want to have children, do we have
a good, a good understanding of the reasons behind
that decision? I mean, what, what leads them to
make that decision?
I can jump in here. So our own research
really hasn't asked people why they don't want to
have children, but other research has examined that, and
people tend to give a really wide range of
reasons. So some people might talk about the high
cost of having children. Some people talk about restrictions
on freedom or career growth. Some people talk about
medical risks, and in some places there's restrictions on
reproductive freedom that may make people cautious about having
children. And there's climate change, there's political forces, but
at least in the United States, a Pew survey
that came out in 2021 found that the majority
of child-free adults said that the reason for not
wanting to have children is that they just didn't
want to have children. So for the most part
it's just a strong desire not to have children
that's that's driving it and not something specific.
Mhm. Yeah, that that's interesting, and I mean one
claim that we hear from many people who are
pro-Nalists is that er people with children are happier
than people without children. Um, IS there any evidence
to support that?
And so there isn't any evidence to support that,
and that's sort of a myth that's out there
about child-free people and about parents, that being a
parent is going to make you a happier person
than somebody who doesn't have kids. But in our
own work we've looked at the life satisfaction of
parents and of child-free people, and we've found absolutely
no difference in life satisfaction. We've also looked at
late life regret. And so child-free people, especially women,
are often told they'll regret their decision later in
life, but there's very little evidence that that actually
happens. In some of our own work we compared
the amount of life regret that older parents and
child-free people experience over the age of 70, and
we Didn't observe any differences, so older child-free people
had no more life regret than older parents. So
there's not a whole lot of evidence that parents
are somehow happier than child-free people, that they have
more life satisfaction, that they have less regret. Um,
REALLY, what seems to make people happy is doing
what they want to do. So if you want
to have children, that and you become a parent,
that would make you happy. If you don't want
to have children and want to remain childfree, that
will make you happy.
You know, it's very interesting because it's always easy
for people to find a few cases, a few
stories of people who regret not having children, uh,
and to put in documentaries and then try to
extrapolate from those specific cases to the broader population
and try to make a case that, oh, because,
particularly women, because they are told that they can
dedicate themselves. Helps to their career, to professional development,
and they can wait until their late 30s or
40s to have children. I mean that that's the
reason why they end up not having children and
then they regret it, but I mean that's not
really a trend or is it, or that's not
really one of the reasons that leads people to
not having children.
Yeah, there's not really evidence of that, at least
in the data that we've looked at, and generally
speaking, if that were the case, if women were
sort of delaying childbirth to, you know, focus on
their careers, for example, we'd expect to see a
lot. More of those childless people in our data,
right, the prevalence of childless people would be much
higher, and Zach spoke about that earlier, but what
we see is actually the prevalence of child-free people
tends to be higher among permanently child, permanently childless
people, so we're not really seeing evidence of that.
So, uh this is uh an interesting one, I
mean, I'm, I'm very er curious uh about hearing
from you. I mean, what do you think about
this question specifically? Have humans really evolved an instinct
to reproduce or simply an instinct to have sex,
because I mean, one thing is different from the
other,
right? Yeah. And I would say, you know, in
looking at the research from anthropologists and biologists, is,
uh, there's a difference between the word instinct, which
is something that we cannot control. It's just something
naturally that happens. So, uh, compared to a drive,
like a biological drive, so, we may have the
drive to have sex, and that's not even universal.
Uh, BUT there's no kind of instinct that we
cannot live without it, uh, that it's so natural
that we cannot control it. So, in that way,
uh, neither the desire to have sex nor reproduce
could be considered an instinct. Um, BUT to go
further, uh, in terms of the drive, you could
say that the capacity and urge for sexual activity
could be or often is deeply rooted in evolutionary
traits that facilitate reproduction. Uh, BUT the specific conscious
desire to rear children is heavily influenced by social,
cultural, environmental, and individual factors rather than like a
single universal biological drive that everyone has. Uh, EVEN
the fact that for, uh, throughout history, we have
had people who have, uh, chosen to not have
children. Uh, EVEN though it was not as easily
accepted, the choice, people always found ways to avoid
having children, uh, tells you that not everybody's wired
to want children. And also you see cases of
people who have had children who um Do not
engage in parental or nurturing or, you know, maternal
types of behaviors. Um, SO, uh, it would be
also wrong to just assume that people who do
have children naturally have some kind of a biological
drive to nurture. That's, that's not always the case
either. Um, DRIVES like nurturing drives can be cultivated.
Uh, BUT for the most part, the, Uh, there's
sufficient research to support that not everyone has even
a biological drive to have sex or to have
children. Sex definitely facilitates reproduction, but for millennia, people
have also found ways to avoid that through, um,
you know, herbs and abortifacient and Um, contraceptives, natural
contraceptives. Uh, BUT the social bias, and this is
my area of research, the prenatalism, the social bias
to have children is so strong that we're often
made to believe that, um, we all are meant
to have children. We hear cultural notions of things
like the biological clock or the maternal instinct, or
even for men, this kind of notion that virility
or, you know, manliness or masculinity tied to how
many children you have, that often, uh, drives people
to have children, um, not from a liberated or
an authentic place, but rather from societal pressures.
Yes, we certainly live in societies that have a
pro-Natalist bias, correct?
Definitely. Yeah, I mean, pro-natalist bias is extremely strong
across all cultures, across all political, uh, you know,
across the political spectrum, across all types of religions,
um, whether you're progressive or conservative, pro-natalism is extremely,
uh, strong. And really, the roots of pro-natalism can
be seen to have institutionalized. Uh, WITH the start
of, um, empires and city-states about 5000 years ago,
when, uh, elites needed to strengthen states by having
large populations. And that's when you see a very
strong delineation between the, in terms of the gender
roles, where women were expected to produce lots of
children. Uh, AND men were expected to participate in
war and be strong, etc. So, a lot of
the gender norms came about then. And, uh, journalist
and author, Angela Saney, her research also shows that
in hunter-gatherer societies, women actually didn't have as many
kids as they did, did after the rise of
civilizations. Um, SO, pro-natalism really became institutionalized through religion,
through laws, through policies, through media, through cultural norms,
and, uh, different punishments that were put into place
for people who didn't have children or large families,
and rewards and even medals, or, you know, honorary
types of, uh, reputation or comments that were, Uh,
rewarded to people who had children and large families.
Which is interesting because sometimes we even hear from
people who make arguments like Stephen J. Shaw makes
in his documentary that one of the reasons why
people nowadays or there are more people nowadays who
are Uh, childless or child-free than before is because
people are exposed to ideas like anti-atalism or something
like that, as if antenatalism is or ever was
popular in society, right?
That's another really huge misconception is that when people,
um, who are interested in promoting reproductive rights and
reproductive autonomy and challenging pro-natalism, that they are automatically
advocating antenatalism. Which is not true at all. An
tenonatalism can be seen as a philosophical or ideological
position that sees having children as unethical, uh, and,
Um, that is not the case for most people
who are child-free. Um, LIKE, uh, uh, Zach spoke
about earlier, most people who are child-free simply want
that choice to be available to everyone. Um, AND,
um, nobody really is going around and saying that
because I don't have children, I want other people
to not have children. There may be some antenatalists
who do do that, who actively promote. Um, NON-PROCREATION,
but most people who are challenging pro-natalism are challenging
the coercive pressures that make it difficult for people
to make liberated choices. Uh, WE should be living
in societies where, um, whether you become a parent
or not, are equally valid and legitimate and acceptable
choices in society.
Mhm. So I, I guess we've already ended up
addressing this question to a large extent, but do
people who reproduce really tend to want large families
because that's another kind of uh claim that uh
Stephen Shaw makes in his documentary.
No, not only do we not have any evidence
to support that, we actually have evidence that supports
the opposite. Uh, THE evidence suggests that as soon
as people, especially women, have the choice to control
their fertility, they tend to have fewer or no
children. Uh, AND we have been seeing that in
the last 70 years, uh, fertility rates have been
declining from what used to be 5 children on
average per woman in her lifetime to now around
2.3. And that is happening across, you know, all
situations, all countries, all religious settings, all political settings.
Uh, IT'S really about choice. As soon as people
have choice, they tend to have fewer children. And,
uh, you know, on the other end of the
spectrum, um, there are all these politicians and economists
and religious leaders who are really panicking about fertility
rates declining. And a big reason for that is
all of those institutions for 5000 years kind of
have relied on a growing population to keep their
institutions strong. And now that we are seeing this
decline happen, really for the first time in history,
uh, through choice, the institutions that have relied on
population growth are being threatened. And so they are
trying all sorts of things in terms of pro-natalist
policies. Well, either they are trying to bribe people
by giving tax credits and baby bonuses, uh, to
encourage them to have large families, or they are
going to the other end of the spectrum by
instituting coercive types of policies like abortion bans and
contraceptive, um, restrictions, so that people don't have a
choice to not have children, they're forced to have
kids. Um, AND in both cases, whether it's coercive
or it's, um, You know, supportive pro-natalist policies, they
are not working. Um, EVEN in the most progressive,
most generous Nordic countries where we have very generous
parental leave policies, childcare, uh, subsidies, healthcare subsidies, um,
great gender equality, you know, shared care work between
partners, you are not seeing that trend of declining
fertility reverse. Uh, AND that just shows that once
people have choice, uh, no amount of government intervention
is going to really reverse that because people are
not having kids for the state.
You know, yeah, I think, oh yeah, go ahead,
sorry. Well,
yeah, so I was just going to add to
Nandita's point. So she was just speaking about, you
know, the case of Nordic countries which are very
wealthy, very highly developed countries that have lots and
lots of, you know, supports for potential parents, and
we don't see those supports reverse a trend toward
lower levels of fertility. We also see that, so
Jenna and I have just completed a study. Of
developing countries largely throughout sub-Saharan Africa but really throughout
the world and so looking at sort of the
other end of the spectrum and one of the
things we see even in these developing countries that
tend to be much poorer, have many fewer resources.
One of the strongest predictors of whether or not
an individual will be child free, will choose not
to have children, is the country's level of human
development, that is the level of access that individuals
have to things like education and healthcare. And so
even among these much poorer countries we see that
as access to healthcare increases, as access to education
increases, The the likelihood that an individual will choose
voluntarily to not have children also increases. And so
this is a trend that we see among the
highly developed world in these sort of Nordic countries
that have lots of wealth and lots of support,
but also in much poorer countries, you know, when
people have education, when people have access to healthcare,
more broadly, when people have an opportunity to choose
whether or not to have children. Increasingly they choose
not to have children, and so much of this
comes down to the ability to make a choice.
And I would imagine that having access to education
also implies having access specifically to sex education and
in the case of healthcare, having access to Planned
Parenthood. I mean, would those things be included there
as well or not?
Certainly, so access to healthcare could include access to
things like contraception, to fertility planning. Access to education
could include access to sex education. But it also
more broadly and especially in developing countries for women,
access to education represents an opportunity for self-actualization, the
ability to, you know, have a career, to have
a job, to do fulfilling work, and so as,
you know, people gain access to these things that
allow them to be the person they want to
be. It gives them the choice to have children
or to not have children, and when people have
the choice about whether to become parents, increasingly they
choose not to become parents. So much of this
boils down to the extent to which people have
that choice, and maybe even more importantly, the extent
to which people recognize they have that choice, that
they, they are not required to have children. They
can choose to have children, perfectly OK, but they
can also choose not to have children. So, so
much of this has to do with with choice.
And I can, if I can add one more
thing to, to actually bolster that point is there
is another study that shows, uh, it's a Swedish
study that looked at 136 countries, uh, and the
fertility data for those countries, and it shows that
one of the greatest determinants of declining fertility rates,
uh, even ahead of education is access to modern
contraception. Uh, EVEN in settings where people do not,
uh, have the ability to go to school or,
you know, get higher education, which we believe should
be universal human rights, um, It doesn't need to
be a precursor to choice. Uh, AS soon as
people have access to, um, fertility control, regardless of
education level, fertility rates start declining across all education
settings.
Which is interesting, right, because conservatives and, uh, I
mean, not conservatives necessarily, but pro-Natalists and particularly the
religious pro-Natalists, not all of them necessarily, but at
least some of them also tend to be against
contraception, right?
Yes, it's, it's true and it's often the case,
and you are seeing that in. Nation states that
have a combination of, you know, state and religion,
um, a lot of restrictions on contraception or abortion
are being driven by a combination of nationalist and
religious, uh, forces.
So let me address another argument that Stephen Shaw
makes in his documentary and that we very, very
commonly hear from. I guess all pro-natalists and particularly
the ones that worry about declining fertility rates. So
is there any evidence that we are headed toward
population collapse, and I mean what would population collapse
even mean here?
Uh, NO, there is no evidence that we're headed
toward population collapse. Human beings have been around for
at least 250,000 years, and for most of that
history, for over 95% of that history, our population
did not go above 10 million. Uh, TODAY, we
are at 8 billion and counting, and, um, really
the, one of the biggest, uh, determinants of population
growth has been, um, pro-natalist pressures through patriarchal control
over women, uh, but also the exponential growth, uh,
because of access to fossil fuels and industrialization. Um,
AND so, my point is that our current population
is the largest population we've ever had in the
history of human Homo sapiens. And we are expected,
according to all, um, you know, uh, projections, uh,
to, to be heading toward either 9 or 10
billion people this century. Um, POPULATION is going to
continue to grow until the 2080s, and then we
might start to see some decline, but very, very
slow decline. Uh, AND demographers are not comfortable projecting
past 30 to 40 years. After that, information becomes
extremely unpredictable. And so, Um, we don't know what's
going to happen after that, but our, um, population
is not headed toward collapse. Uh, IF anything, we
are seeing signs of ecological collapse in terms of
our biodiversity, uh, plummeting and our ecosystems, um, really
crashing, um, because of the Human activity and presence
and what we are doing in terms of climate
change and other um ecological crises we're facing. Um,
BUT in terms of population collapses the way most
People like Stephen Shaw are claiming there is no
evidence to support that we are going to go
extinct anytime soon.
And I mean, even if people are a little
bit worried and as you said there, I don't
think that there's good reasons for people to be
worried about even uh population, the global population reducing
a little bit after it gets to 10, 9
or 10 billion. Isn't 9 or 10 billion humans
more than enough to keep the, like the standards
of living we have now?
It's actually, um, having that many people is uh
is actually interferes with people having all people having
a good standard of living because we currently, even
at 8 billion and counting, are using 80% more.
Uh, RESOURCES and producing more waste than Earth can
handle. And there is great inequality in terms of
how those, uh, resources are distributed and how the
impacts of these ecological crises are distributed, where, um,
some of the countries with the highest fertility rates
often are also the countries that are going to
suffer the most from migration and uh death because
of these issues. And so, currently, we don't have
enough at this level of population to uh allow
everyone to live a good standard of living. And
so, a declining population actually enables us not just
to have a more habitable planet, but also to
be able to distribute resources, uh, and wealth more
equitably across all populations.
Do do you think that there's evidence to claim
that, um, I mean, because people are worried about,
or some people are worried about declining fertility rates,
particularly in the more developed countries, do you think
that if we have enough people in the world.
That perhaps some of these people are anti-immigration because
what they really want is for the right people,
the right people in their mind to have babies
and not just people in general.
I think it's fair to say that in many
cases, that is true. A lot of the current
pro-natalism, uh, within in these indus industrialized countries is
being driven by anti-migrant, uh, rhetoric and behaviors, um,
and sentiments. Um, WHERE, yeah, there's a concern that
we don't have enough of the right kind of
people, so we don't want to, to bring other
people into our countries. Uh, YOU can see that
in Hungary, you know, Orban, um, President Orban made
the statement that for Hungary, uh, we need more
Hungarian babies. For us, migration is a form of
surrender. You're seeing that current rhetoric in the United
States, where uh there is, while at the same
time, President Trump is pushing for a lot of
coercive pro-natalist policies, he calls himself the fertilization president,
uh, and pushing for all sorts of um pro-natalism,
there's also, uh, a real, um, anti-migrant sentiment there.
Um, SO it is true for many countries, but
it's, uh, not necessary for pro-natalism to be alive
and well. Even countries that are pro-immigration can be
very pro-natalist. They just want more people. It doesn't
matter who they are, and they are often driven
by economic reasons. They just want to keep the
economy growing. And I can speak to that more
later if you like, the economic growth.
Yes, I mean, I was just trying to say
that certainly at least in some cases there's a
link between a pro-NATalist narrative and a far right
racist, xenophobic narrative,
right? Very much so, yes.
Now, one thing I might add is, um, this,
this link between pro-natalism and far-right ideology, you know,
may occur in some places, it may be tenuous
in other cases, but there's also a subtle link
when we think about the metrics that get invoked
in these conversations. So, on the one hand, the
focus is often on a country's total population. And
the concern is often expressed in terms of a
falling total population. And the implications of that for
the country's economic and social well-being. On the other
hand, the focus is often on things like fertility
rates, which are only focused on the number of
births in a country. And by focusing on those
two metrics, it sets up a dialogue in which
we think or the speaker, you know, sort of
implies the only way to increase a country's population
size is by increasing its fertility rate by having
more native births, and obviously that's that's not necessarily
the case. A country's total population could increase by
having, you know, higher levels of migration, but very
rarely does migration. You know, feature into that conversation.
And so by focusing on the one hand total
population size and on the other hand fertility rates,
it implies and sets up this this impression that
the only way to boost a country's population is
by boosting fertility. But that's, that's simply not the
case. There are lots of different factors that influence
a country's total population size. Fertility is really just
one of those pieces. So some of this link
between pro-natalism and immigration is baked right into the
metrics that are used in these sorts of conversations.
Mhm. Uh, ANOTHER issue, or, I mean, yeah, another
issue that we haven't tackled yet has to do
with aging populations. I mean, is it really the
case that aging populations necessarily need more babies, and
I, that's another claim made by Steven Shaw in
his argument, so what do we know about that?
Yeah, so that is probably one of the most
common arguments that is being brought forth when it's
not driven by religious or nationalist reasons to, to
grow fertility. Um, MANY progressive countries are concerned about
falling birth rates because of economic reasons, uh, primarily
being this notion that we will not have enough
people, working-age people, to support the Social Security or
pensions and healthcare for an aging population. And that
is based on Um, a metric called the, uh,
old age dependency ratio, which was developed about 75
years ago, that looks at how many people there
are working age, uh, if you can believe it,
uh, UN still uses, uh, 15 to 69 or
64 as their working age population and 65 and
above, and 15 and below as dependents that are,
you know, people, uh, young people and old people
that are dependent on the working age population. Um,
NUMBER one, the metric is quite old, and, um,
it, it, you know, a lot of people who
are still using that metric are failing to see
the, uh, dramatic shifts that have happened in the
last 75 years. Um, NUMBER one, people are living
longer and healthier lives. So a 65-year-old today is
likely to be active and working and wanting to
stay active in some kind of employment. Um, AND,
you know, like my parents are in their late
70s, early 80s, and they're still active, and, and
my, my father still wants, you know, they both
are kind of working in different ways. And I,
it's, it's true for many people that, um, depending
on, um, the, their health, most people want to
remain employed in meaningful work, um, and are employed
beyond 65. Um, THE other issue here is the,
as fertility rates have gone down in the last
70 to 75 years, we have seen female labor
participation rates go up significantly. Um, SO, um, that
number of the working age population, that people are
just thinking, well, it's, it's going down. That is
missing is more older people are working, more females
are working, but also, there are fewer dependents under
15 because there people are having fewer children. So,
the weight of dependence from the lower end of
the age group is, you know, shifting more toward
the higher age group. Um, And the, the third
part is that, uh, since people are living healthier
lives and longer lives in, in most industrialized countries,
They do not require health support, serious health support
until the last several years of their lives. So,
this notion that as soon as you turn 65,
suddenly your health bills and suddenly, you know, your
pension and all of those things are, are going
to skyrocket are based on an outdated metric, which
is not representative of today's, um, Data. Um, AND
the other thing that's often not talked about is
the Extreme chronic degree of joblessness among people who
are jobless, not by choice, but because of discrimination.
Um, BUT it could be ageism, it could be
sexism, it could be ableism. So, people with disabilities,
people who are seniors, Uh, people of color, people
who are foreign born migrant workers often are unable
to find work because of discrimination. So, there are
so many opportunities for policies to actually become more
caring and more inclusive, if you really wanted to
solve that issue of having a greater working age
population. Um, BUT in my work, we also really
challenge this notion that we need to just keep
feeding the machine, basically to keep, you know, our
labor inputs high so that we get money to
support the, the elderly. We need to really shift
our economic structure so it's not constantly dependent on
this. Input of growth. We just need more people,
whether it's children or migrants to, to keep that,
um, formulation going. Um, WE need to shift our
economic structures. There are lots of different econo economic,
economic models that are out there that talk about
well-being and caring economies rather than growth economies. Um,
AND so, There's no shortage of, of ideas here.
There's, you know, lots of different things. You know,
another thing to discuss would be, why are people
like Stephen Shaw and others not challenging the extreme
inequality in wealth distribution. The fact that the top
1% has more wealth, uh, than the bottom 50%.
Um, WHY there is such an immense opportunity there
to, um, uh, apply appropriate progressive taxes there to
help with redistribution that can then go toward social
safety nets like retirement, pension and healthcare for older
and younger people alike. Um, IT'S just a really
old and outdated and kind of sexist and ageist
argument. That we need to keep producing more babies
to help elderly people who are seen as burdens.
Yes, I, uh, that's that last point you made
there was, uh, you made, uh, I, I was
actually going to say that I mean we can
tax the rich, of course, but then there's also
the thing that many of these people do not
consider in their projections when it comes to social
security in the future and so on, that has
to do with uh over time productivity. TENDS to
increase and so if productivity increases, we need actually
fewer people to sustain the same number of retirees,
right? So I mean that's another thing and it
probably will go on increasing due to new technological
developments and so on and people having higher and
higher education, so. That's, it's to be expected that
it will go on increasing and that will also
contribute to us needing fewer people to sustain the
same number of dependent people, right? And the and
the other thing as well that I would add
is that we tend to think that just because
we pay pensions to older people, that that's just
so. Social spending, but actually those people also contribute
to the economy because they have to spend their
pensions in different kinds of services and products. So
it's not that we're just spending that money that
at the end of the day it's uh the
account is negative because of we're giving that money
to dependent people,
right? Yes, that's right, yes.
So, uh, about the growing population, I mean, uh,
Nandita, you've already mentioned that of course it's bad
for the environment, the climate for us to have
more and more and more people consuming and polluting
and so on, uh, but I, I guess that
the other thing here as well that many times
people do not consider is that having uh Fewer
people also has benefits in terms of accessing social
services and better wages because when there's fewer workers,
usually wages go up, for example, and it's easier
for the state to provide good quality social services
to fewer people as well,
right. Definitely, and that's a great point that you
bring up is, um, for all of the panic
around declining fertility rates and not having enough people
in the workforce, um, Part of that is, um,
you know, by a constantly growing, growing population allows
companies and industries to keep wages low because it
keeps competition high, uh, which means the benefits and
the working conditions, uh, that are being provided for
people are often quite poor because they are seen
as easily disposable. Someone else will work for cheaper
if you don't want to work. Whereas if you
have, uh, tighter markets, labor markets, uh, it does
provide opportunity to provide greater wages, greater working conditions,
greater benefits, but also to make the workplace more
inclusive, uh, toward people who are unable to find
work because of discrimination, as I mentioned before. Uh,
SO, I agree with you that fewer people provides
not just better working opportunities, but also greater, uh,
as, as Zach talked about, you know, human development
index goes up because, um, you don't require, All
that money to go toward building more things and
more infrastructure and more, um, hospitals and schools, etc.
BUT you can put that money toward better social
services for the people who are currently there. In
many countries where population is still growing really quickly,
The services and infrastructure is not able to keep
up with the growth in population. And so you
see the human, uh, development index quality is very,
very poor, um, because there are just not enough,
there's not enough, uh, services and money available to
support the people.
Mhm, um, SO a different kind of question now,
um, about women's reproductive rights because as we've already
mentioned here, uh, many pro-Natalists tend to support policies
that uh. ARE for example, anti-abortion, anti-access to contraception,
and so on. So would you guys say that
pro-natalism generally speaking also represents a threat to women's
reproductive rights?
Jenna, did you want to say it, and I
can also add later.
Yeah, I think it can, right? So we have
seen in some cases pronatalist policies that roll back
reproductive rights in the US, the right to abortion
had been protected by the Supreme Court decision Roe
v. Wade. But in 2022 that decision was overturned
by Dobbs v. Jackson, for example, and after that
decision, abortion and other reproductive rights varied by the
state. And what's interesting about it though is that
we also know that when reproductive rights are rolled
back or when there's threats to reproductive. Rights that
might actually backfire in terms of doing what prenatalists
want, so prenatalists want that to lead to having
more births, but we kind of studied this in
Michigan. So in Michigan there was significant confusion after
Dobbs v. Jackson. There was a zombie law on
the books that made abortion. Illegal. And so when
Dobbs v. Jackson came out, that law was there
and then there were multiple conflicting court decisions during
that period where things kind of went back and
forth whether women had the right to an abortion,
and we actually studied the child-free prevalence during this
confusion. During that period of confusion, we observed that
the number of Michigan adults identifying as child-free rose
from 21% before the decision to nearly 26% right
after. And so these policies, even though they're sometimes
rolling back women's rights to rep reproductive access, reproductive
care, they can actually lead to more women deciding,
oh, I'm just not going to have children because
I don't have, you know, the reproductive health care,
for example, available to me, and Mandada, you probably
also have thoughts about those as well.
Yeah, thank you for that, uh, a specific example
in the US because I think it's, it's so
helpful to, to see that. Uh, AND I think
pro-natalism in general is very harmful to people, all
people in general, because it, Um, really prevents authentic,
liberated decision making, if, whether it's subtle pressures coming
from parents, you know, to give them grandchildren, or
it's messaging in the media that is, you know,
looking at, um, gender reveal parties or, you know,
baby bumps and uh in terms of celebrity gossip.
It's this notion that everybody wants to have children,
everybody should have children. It's like romanticization of parenthood
when in reality, um, it's not the case for
most parents. Uh, THAT is not what it looks
like the way we see it in movies, but
to Answer your question more directly about a threat
to reproductive rights, uh, pro-natalism is so pervasive across,
um, the globe that, uh, people who are unable
to have children or don't want children are often
are ostracized or marginalized or punished in society,
particularly women,
right, particularly women. And if you look at, you
know, what are the drivers of population growth today,
it is heavily, uh, coercive pro-natalism. So, I'll give
you some statistics. Uh, TODAY, across the globe, including
progressive countries with, you know, strong, uh, gender equal
laws, we see 50% of all pregnancies are unintended.
Um, AND that's because of, uh, prenatalism. There's even
internalized, um, you know, notions of people not wanting
to have an abortion because there's so much stigma
attached to that, uh, or lack of, you know,
access to contraception. But then, um, 640 million women
and girls that are alive today were married as
children. So, child brides who then went on to
have lots of children while they're still young and,
and youthful, um, is one of the greater reasons
for population growing, and that's a form of pro-natalism.
And if you look across the globe, especially in
lower and middle-income countries, there are over 250 million
women who want to avoid the next pregnancy, who
don't want to have a child or another child,
but they cannot make that decision. And that sometimes
is a problem with access. They cannot access healthcare
services, but more often than not, it's these religious
and, um, cultural messages that prevent women from actually
exercising that choice. Um, MYTHS that, uh, using contraceptives
will make you permanently infertile, or it'll give you
cancer. Um, YOU know, or it's a sin. So,
and same goes with men, like not producing enough
children or not having any children means you are
not a virile man, means you're not a masculine
man. And, and men will get punished in their
own ways by being pushed out of communities and
societies if they, if they don't have children. So,
yes, pro-natalism of any kind prevents liberated choices, but
especially the coercive kind is a direct threat to
reproductive rights because, um, people, You know, are getting
illegal abortions and dying from those because legal abortions
and legal contraceptives are not available.
Uh, YES, earlier when I asked you directly about
women's reproductive rights, it was not because I was
trying to imply that men cannot be victims of
discrimination for being child-free, of course they can be
and they are. It's just that since it's women
or females that, uh, basically get pregnant, right, they
are usually. The ones that tend to get the
most discrimination from society, right? They are the ones
that are discriminated the most for being child-free, not
wanting children, and so on, uh, and, um, I
mean, when it comes to abortion specifically, it's interesting
because actually many people argue and even the Uh,
uh, the, uh, the, um, uh, uh, I mean,
doctors and people who are associated with healthcare argue,
and I think rightly so, that abortion is a
healthcare issue because, uh, women, who, who don't want
to have children, I mean, they're going to do,
uh, to do abortions anyway. It's just that they're
going to do them in. Uh, ENVIRONMENTS that are
not safe, that are not in the clinic or
a hospital. Uh, AND so, I mean, it's a,
it's a matter of healthcare and also the other
thing is that, uh, Anti-abortion policies actually tend to
er promote uh abortion because the, the number of
abortions go higher when there's not a legal access
to abortion because this has been studied for example
in Nordic Nordic countries in here in Europe which
have the most progressive uh policies that are the
most gender equal and so on. Um, uh, ABORTION,
the number of abortions actually will go, goes down,
uh, by it being legal and, uh, accessible in
the healthcare system,
right. Yes, that's, uh, an excellent point, Ricardo, and,
um, Guttmacher Institute is another great research, uh, think
tank that provides a lot of data on what
you just said is, uh, countries, nation states that
don't have strong reproductive healthcare access, uh, tend to
see, um, increase in illegal abortions because, like I
said, You know, 50% of all pregnancies around the
world are unplanned, meaning contraceptives, even if you are
using contraceptives, no contraceptive is fail-safe. Um, AND so,
these accidents happen, and so abortion should not be
seen as a, some kind of a last resort.
It should be, uh, you know, availability to legal
abortion should really be part of reproductive healthcare. Um,
BECAUSE so much, so many pregnancies are unwanted and
unplanned.
Mhm, YEAH, so, I mean, is there anything else
you would like to add some final message just
before we go? I mean, anything else about, uh,
topics that we've discussed here like child free choices
or pro-natalism that you would like for people to
know?
You know, Ricardo, I guess 11 closing point, and
this is something that we've heard from others as
we've we've shared some of our research on child-free
adults, but just to remind your viewers that, you
know, much of this is about choice and for
those that have children or are maybe considering having
children, want to have children. If that's what they
want to do, that's fantastic, and they should, and
you know, I think everyone would wish them the
best. But for those of you, your viewers who
don't want children, our research is increasingly finding that
that's a very large population. If they choose not
to have children, they'll be joining a very large
group of others who have also chosen not to
have children, and that choice is OK too. I
think that the message that You know, one of
the messages we're trying to get out in our
research is not to advocate that people have children
or advocate that people don't have children, but to
advocate choice and to encourage people to follow the
reproductive life course that makes sense for them and
for some people that's having children and for other
people that's not having children, and both paths are
OK. Both paths are normative. They'll find themselves in
good company no matter which direction they choose. And
so really just to remind your viewers that all
of these are, are acceptable ways of living and
going about your life and are increasingly common.
Great. So, Nandi, uh, Zach, Jennifer, thank you so
much for coming on the show. I really love
your website, by the way, the Birth gap Facts
website. So I'm going to leave a link to
it in the description and also to your, uh,
uh, to the other places where people can find
you on the internet and, uh, thank you so
much for doing this. It's been great fun to
talk with you.
Thank you so much, Ricardo. It was great to
talk to you. Thanks, Ricardo.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pancortezus Suliliski,
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and Wiseman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai,
Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio
Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr. Old
Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler, Alexander
Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannaertner,
Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to my
producers is are Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink, Tom
Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlimon Negro, Al Nick Cortiz
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan, Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.